docs/source/grammar.rst, before:

The *Bed Spread* Expression Grammar
========================================

.. contents:: Table of Contents
    :depth: 2

Literals
----------

Numbers
.............
You can write numbers in scientific notation if you like: ``6.02e+23`` is Avogadro's number, for example.
You can also use hexadecimal: ``$ffff`` is 65,535 in decimal.
(You can also use ``0x`` or ``#`` to prefix a hex numeral.)
And you can split digit groups with the underscore character: ``1_000_000_000`` is more clearly
equal to ``1e9`` than is ``1000000000``.

Text
......
.. versionadded:: 0.0.1

Simple text strings may be enclosed between double-quotes, ``"like this"``.
If you need anything more complicated, see the section *Text and Templates* under :doc:`derived`.

Sequences
...........
.. note:: This is planned. It does not yet work.

How about something like ``[: 2, 3, 5, 7, 11 :]`` as an array of six numbers?
Probably it should work with regular parenthesis too,
and work as a valid single-argument to a function.
In other words, we should be able to write something like ``sum(: 1, 4, 9, 16 :)``
and get a valid answer.

As for getting information back out of an array, probably the answer should be an infix operator ``{at}``.
(In fact, the same operator could also be defined for dictionaries.)

.. note::
    I concede this is a couple more keystrokes than some other languages,
    but it fits in with making round and square brackets interchangeable (so long as they remain balanced).
    And why do we want that interchangeability?
    Because it's a gentle way to localize syntax goofs.

    Also incidentally, this leaves open several avenues for extension.
    For example, I've an idea to express recurrence relations using back-reference syntax.

Sets
.....
*To be determined.*

Probably end up doing sets as a function that constructs them from sequences.

Matrices / Multidimensional Arrays
....................................
*To be determined.*

Dictionaries and the like
......................................
*To be determined.*

Names
---------

The naming convention for variables in *Bed Spread* is similar to most modern programming languages:
start with a letter, then are allowed letters, digits, and underscores.
There are no identifiers starting with underscore at this time because that's a terrible hack that we should not need.

At the moment, names are case sensitive, but I'll probably change that in a future version.

Key-Words
----------
Some names (like ``and``) are off-limits as identifiers because they are keywords with special meaning in the language.
All keywords are independent of case. (For instance, you could spell it ``AND`` or even ``aNd``.)
However, names may absolutely contain components that might otherwise look like keywords.
Thus, both ``sand`` and ``andrew`` are valid names.

Arithmetic
----------

Arithmetic looks like you learned in school: ``+``, ``+``, ``*``, ``/`` for the basic four functions.
Exponentiation is ``^`` and right-associative, so ``3^3^3`` is equal to ``3^27``, which is a very big number.

Parentheses work like you would expect for grouping. That is, ``3 + 4 * 5`` is 23, but ``(3 + 4) * 5`` is 35.
For clarity, you may also use square brackets like ``[ 123 + 456 ]`` for grouping.
The round and square brackets must nest and balance properly.

Text Operators
---------------
.. versionadded:: 0.0.1

As a side effect of current implementation techniques, the ``+`` operator works to concatenate text.
For example, ``"abc" + "def"`` yields the first six letters of the English alphabet.

.. warning::
    This particular choice of syntax may be subject to change in the future.
    Something like ``||`` (as used in SQL) might more clearly indicate that text is expected on either side.
    The long-term goal is that all expressions get type-checked before anything runs,
    but as long as large swathes of functionality are imported wholesale from the host (Python)
    environment, that's a bit ambitious for the moment. (One idea is to import a bunch of type judgments as well.)

The other major text-oriented facility currently defined is substituting values into a text template.
That's described in the section *Text and Templates* under :doc:`derived`.

Relational Operators
----------------------

You can compare quantities using ``<`` ``<=`` ``=`` ``!=`` ``>=`` ``>``.
In a nod to other languages, you can use ``==`` as a synonym for ``=``,
and you can use ``<>`` as a synonym for ``!=`` (i.e. *does-not-equal*).
The result of any such comparison is a Boolean True/False quantity.
Relational comparisons have lower precedence than arithmetic.

Logical Operators
---------------------

* ``AND``, ``OR``, and ``NOT`` work in the usual way.
* ``EQV`` means *logical equivalence:* either both true or both false.
* ``XOR`` means *exclusive-or:* either, but not both, are true.

They're also not case-sensitive, so you can use lower-case if you prefer (and I do so prefer).
``NOT`` binds more tightly than the other logical operators,
but there is otherwise no precedence relationship between them:
they work strictly from left to right.

Custom Operators and Adverbs
-----------------------------

.. note:: This is planned. It does not yet work.

After a bit of play-testing, I find a surprisingly large number of good use-cases for infix-operator syntax.
This makes an argument to support them. (Pun most definitely intended.)
Therefore, I have decided on a syntax and semantics for defining and using such contraptions.

.. note::
    In this context, *infix operator* means something like *plus*, *minus*, or *multiplied-by*:
    something written in-between two values to express a new value.

Named Operators
........................

The contents of ``{`` curly braces ``}`` are taken to be a custom operation, possibly modified by adverbs.
When it's used infix (i.e. between two values) it has the same precedence and associativity as multiplication or division.
When used prefix (i.e. before a value, either at the beginning of an expression or after some infix operator)
then it
(You can always use brackets or parentheses to control this directly.)

A few named infix operations are pre-defined. These listed in the section at :doc:`intrinsic`.

.. admonition:: Implementation Note

    Define infix operators as records in the ``infix`` table.
    They implicitly have parameters ``a`` and ``b``,
    standing for the left- and right-hand operands respectively.

Adverbs
........

Between the ``{`` curly braces, ``}`` you can put more than just an operator name.
You may in fact prefix an operator with one or more adverbs. In fact,
you can do this to any infix operator, not just the named ones.

Ok, but what the bleep is an adverb?

Simply put, adverbs modify the meaning of an operation, generally in the context of array (or other collection) types.
The concept may be thought of as a standardized form for certain kinds of high-order functions.
By way of example:

* ``{fold +} someArray`` calculates the sum of the values of ``someArray``.
* ``0 {unfold +} someArray`` produces a running total of those same values.
* ``0 {pairwise reverse -} someArray`` is the inverse operation to the above,
  computing the delta from one element to the next (and assuming a zero origin).

The three examples above illustrate a subtlety:
In each case, the root operation was infix.

For more on this, there's to be a documentation section on predefined things -- eventually.

Incidentally, I may wind up taking more of a page from APL and cause some of the standard adverbs
to be expressed as punctuation instead.

.. admonition:: Implementation Note

    Define adverbs operators as records in the ``adverb`` table.
    They implicitly have parameters ``a``, ``b``,
    standing for the left- and right-hand operands respectively.

Precedence and Associativity
.............................

When a ``{`` curly brace ``}`` form appears *infix* (i.e. between two values),
the structure overall has the same precedence and associativity as multiplication or division.

When such a form appears *prefix*, it binds very tightly to the right, similar to unary negation.

Caveats
.........

Not every combination of adverbs and operations necessarily makes sense.
Others may make perfect sense but simply be unimplemented (yet).

Selection among Alternatives
----------------------------

You can write an expression like ``( when a > b then c; when d < e then f; else g )``
and it will mean either ``c``, ``f``, or ``g`` according to the values of the other variables.
Once again, the keywords ``WHEN``, ``THEN``, and ``ELSE`` are not case-sensitive.

Unless this conditional form is the outermost expression of a formula,
it must be enclosed directly in either round or square brackets.
(This eliminates all sorts of potential ambiguities.)


Calling Functions
-------------------

Function application also looks like you're used to from math class.
For instance, the cosine of the square of ``x`` could be written as ``cos(x^2)``.
The (round) parentheses are necessary in this case to indicate that you're applying a function.

Functions with more than one parameter take keyword-arguments (only).
For example, there's a built-in function ``atan2`` which takes an X-Y coordinate and
gives you back the corresponding angle, taking the sign of both arguments into account.
You can call it as ``atan2(x:1, y:2)`` or ``atan2(y:1, x:-2)``.

An interesting thing you can do with functions of more than one parameter is
called "partial application": By supplying *just some* of the arguments,
this creates a new function in which only the other parameters remain.
So, in the above example, you could write ``atan2(x:1)(y:2)`` and it would do the right thing.


Records and Fields
-------------------
.. versionadded:: 0.0.1

Some values in *Bed Spread* are records: they have a collection of named fields.

Creating Record Values
.......................
Record-type names may be used as if they were functions. Indeed they are (very simple) functions:
they create a record of the given type, with the given values for each field.

Accessing Fields
...................
You can access the fields of records using the dot-notation common to many languages.
(Also, text and some objects that come back from built-in functions may have fields you can access.)
For example, say you have a record-value called ``joe``. Then ``joe.eye_color`` would
refer to Joe's eye color, assuming ``joe`` has a field called ``eye_color``.
(If there is no such field, *Bed Spread* gets stuck at that expression.)

.. admonition:: Implementation Note

    In the Python-based interpreter, record-types are implemented in terms of the ``collections.namedtuple`` facility.
    Field access is therefore ``getattr``, and in consequence most of the object-oriented features of Python
    leak through the abstraction layer. This is handy for the foreign-function interface, but it means that
    potentially impure code could result.

Furthermore, if a field turns out to be a function of no remaining arguments, then it's called immediately.
Thus, for example, in **Bed Spread** you can write ``Gettysburg.upper`` and get back the
Gettysburg Address in upper case.

Lambda Forms
-------------

Don't let the Greek letter scare you. This is just how you pass functionality around.
Once the system around the language is a bit more developed, these may be less tempting
because it will always be possible to give some fragment of function a name.

An expression like ``\ x [ x + x ]`` means "a function that returns double its argument.
You can pass it as a parameter to another function, or you can call it directly
just as if it were the name of a function. (In fact, on the inside, function names
simply refer to objects like this.)

A form like the above, with a single parameter, takes a single anonymous argument.
If you need more than one parameter, simply separate them with whitespace.
For an extended example::

    \a b c[ (-b + sqrt(b^2 - 4*a*c)) / (2*a) ] (a:2, b:4, c:-8)

is how you might write, and then immediately use, a function that returns one root of a quadratic equation.

Inside the square brackets, you can use any name known outside them,
plus also the new names introduced as parameters.

Because there is no ambiguity, you can use round parentheses if you prefer.
You can also go with curly braces for a parameterized selection.

Clauses like "let" or "where"
-----------------------------
If you've been writing functional programs for a while,
you're used to having some way to factor out common subexpressions.
Something serving that purpose will show up in a future version of the language.
The plan is not yet fully-formed, but it will involve changes to the database schema
in order to represent static scoping relationships.
This probably depends on having a suitable code editor tool first.

Note on Evaluation Order
------------------------
The long-term plan is lazy evaluation (call-by-need) with a reasonable-sized memoization cache.
Maybe also some knobs and dials to tune performance or behavior.
But for the moment, I'm primarily focused on getting something fundamentally usable.

Commit message:

Add some toy subproblems (with tests)

docs/source/grammar.rst, after:

The *Bed Spread* Expression Grammar
========================================

.. contents:: Table of Contents
    :depth: 2

Literals
----------

Numbers
.............
You can write numbers in scientific notation if you like: ``6.02e+23`` is Avogadro's number, for example.
You can also use hexadecimal: ``$ffff`` is 65,535 in decimal.
(You can also use ``0x`` or ``#`` to prefix a hex numeral.)
And you can split digit groups with the underscore character: ``1_000_000_000`` is more clearly
equal to ``1e9`` than is ``1000000000``.

Text
......
.. versionadded:: 0.0.1

Simple text strings may be enclosed between double-quotes, ``"like this"``.
If you need anything more complicated, see the section *Text and Templates* under :doc:`derived`.

Sequences
...........
.. note:: This is planned. It does not yet work.

How about something like ``[: 2, 3, 5, 7, 11 :]`` as an array of six numbers?
Probably it should work with regular parenthesis too,
and work as a valid single-argument to a function.
In other words, we should be able to write something like ``sum(: 1, 4, 9, 16 :)``
and get a valid answer.

As for getting information back out of an array, probably the answer should be an infix operator ``{at}``.
(In fact, the same operator could also be defined for dictionaries.)

.. note::
    I concede this is a couple more keystrokes than some other languages,
    but it fits in with making round and square brackets interchangeable (so long as they remain balanced).
    And why do we want that interchangeability?
    Because it's a gentle way to localize syntax goofs.

    Also incidentally, this leaves open several avenues for extension.
    For example, I've an idea to express recurrence relations using back-reference syntax.

.. note::
    Long literal sequences should probably be done as some sort of static-data concept.
    Meanwhile, they can be factored out to separate formula symbols.

Sets
.....
*To be determined.*

Probably end up doing sets as a function that constructs them from sequences.

Matrices / Multidimensional Arrays
....................................
*To be determined.*

Dictionaries and the like
......................................
*To be determined.*

Names
---------

The naming convention for variables in *Bed Spread* is similar to most modern programming languages:
start with a letter, then are allowed letters, digits, and underscores.
There are no identifiers starting with underscore at this time because that's a terrible hack that we should not need.

At the moment, names are case sensitive, but I'll probably change that in a future version.

Key-Words
----------
Some names (like ``and``) are off-limits as identifiers because they are keywords with special meaning in the language.
All keywords are independent of case. (For instance, you could spell it ``AND`` or even ``aNd``.)
However, names may absolutely contain components that might otherwise look like keywords.
Thus, both ``sand`` and ``andrew`` are valid names.

Arithmetic
----------

Arithmetic looks like you learned in school: ``+``, ``+``, ``*``, ``/`` for the basic four functions.
Exponentiation is ``^`` and right-associative, so ``3^3^3`` is equal to ``3^27``, which is a very big number.

Parentheses work like you would expect for grouping. That is, ``3 + 4 * 5`` is 23, but ``(3 + 4) * 5`` is 35.
For clarity, you may also use square brackets like ``[ 123 + 456 ]`` for grouping.
The round and square brackets must nest and balance properly.

Text Operators
---------------
.. versionadded:: 0.0.1

As a side effect of current implementation techniques, the ``+`` operator works to concatenate text.
For example, ``"abc" + "def"`` yields the first six letters of the English alphabet.

.. warning::
    This particular choice of syntax may be subject to change in the future.
    Something like ``||`` (as used in SQL) might more clearly indicate that text is expected on either side.
    The long-term goal is that all expressions get type-checked before anything runs,
    but as long as large swathes of functionality are imported wholesale from the host (Python)
    environment, that's a bit ambitious for the moment. (One idea is to import a bunch of type judgments as well.)

The other major text-oriented facility currently defined is substituting values into a text template.
That's described in the section *Text and Templates* under :doc:`derived`.

Relational Operators
----------------------

You can compare quantities using ``<`` ``<=`` ``=`` ``!=`` ``>=`` ``>``.
In a nod to other languages, you can use ``==`` as a synonym for ``=``,
and you can use ``<>`` as a synonym for ``!=`` (i.e. *does-not-equal*).
The result of any such comparison is a Boolean True/False quantity.
Relational comparisons have lower precedence than arithmetic.

Logical Operators
---------------------

* ``AND``, ``OR``, and ``NOT`` work in the usual way.
* ``EQV`` means *logical equivalence:* either both true or both false.
* ``XOR`` means *exclusive-or:* either, but not both, are true.

They're also not case-sensitive, so you can use lower-case if you prefer (and I do so prefer).
``NOT`` binds more tightly than the other logical operators,
but there is otherwise no precedence relationship between them:
they work strictly from left to right.

Custom Operators and Adverbs
-----------------------------

.. note:: This is planned. It does not yet work.

After a bit of play-testing, I find a surprisingly large number of good use-cases for infix-operator syntax.
This makes an argument to support them. (Pun most definitely intended.)
Therefore, I have decided on a syntax and semantics for defining and using such contraptions.

.. note::
    In this context, *infix operator* means something like *plus*, *minus*, or *multiplied-by*:
    something written in-between two values to express a new value.

Named Operators
........................

The contents of ``{`` curly braces ``}`` are taken to be a custom operation, possibly modified by adverbs.
When it's used infix (i.e. between two values) it has the same precedence and associativity as multiplication or division.
When used prefix (i.e. before a value, either at the beginning of an expression or after some infix operator)
then it
(You can always use brackets or parentheses to control this directly.)

A few named infix operations are pre-defined. These listed in the section at :doc:`intrinsic`.

.. admonition:: Implementation Note

    Define infix operators as records in the ``infix`` table.
    They implicitly have parameters ``a`` and ``b``,
    standing for the left- and right-hand operands respectively.

Adverbs
........

Between the ``{`` curly braces, ``}`` you can put more than just an operator name.
You may in fact prefix an operator with one or more adverbs. In fact,
you can do this to any infix operator, not just the named ones.

Ok, but what the bleep is an adverb?

Simply put, adverbs modify the meaning of an operation, generally in the context of array (or other collection) types.
The concept may be thought of as a standardized form for certain kinds of high-order functions.
By way of example:

* ``{fold +} someArray`` calculates the sum of the values of ``someArray``.
* ``0 {unfold +} someArray`` produces a running total of those same values.
* ``0 {pairwise reverse -} someArray`` is the inverse operation to the above,
  computing the delta from one element to the next (and assuming a zero origin).

The three examples above illustrate a subtlety:
In each case, the root operation was infix.

For more on this, there's to be a documentation section on predefined things -- eventually.

Incidentally, I may wind up taking more of a page from APL and cause some of the standard adverbs
to be expressed as punctuation instead.

.. admonition:: Implementation Note

    Define adverbs operators as records in the ``adverb`` table.
    They implicitly have parameters ``a``, ``b``,
    standing for the left- and right-hand operands respectively.

Precedence and Associativity
.............................

When a ``{`` curly brace ``}`` form appears *infix* (i.e. between two values),
the structure overall has the same precedence and associativity as multiplication or division.

When such a form appears *prefix*, it binds very tightly to the right, similar to unary negation.

Caveats
.........

Not every combination of adverbs and operations necessarily makes sense.
Others may make perfect sense but simply be unimplemented (yet).

Selection among Alternatives
----------------------------

You can write an expression like ``( when a > b then c; when d < e then f; else g )``
and it will mean either ``c``, ``f``, or ``g`` according to the values of the other variables.
Once again, the keywords ``WHEN``, ``THEN``, and ``ELSE`` are not case-sensitive.

Unless this conditional form is the outermost expression of a formula,
it must be enclosed directly in either round or square brackets.
(This eliminates all sorts of potential ambiguities.)


Calling Functions
-------------------

Function application also looks like you're used to from math class.
For instance, the cosine of the square of ``x`` could be written as ``cos(x^2)``.
The (round) parentheses are necessary in this case to indicate that you're applying a function.

Functions with more than one parameter take keyword-arguments (only).
For example, there's a built-in function ``atan2`` which takes an X-Y coordinate and
gives you back the corresponding angle, taking the sign of both arguments into account.
You can call it as ``atan2(x:1, y:2)`` or ``atan2(y:1, x:-2)``.

An interesting thing you can do with functions of more than one parameter is
called "partial application": By supplying *just some* of the arguments,
this creates a new function in which only the other parameters remain.
So, in the above example, you could write ``atan2(x:1)(y:2)`` and it would do the right thing.


Records and Fields
-------------------
.. versionadded:: 0.0.1

Some values in *Bed Spread* are records: they have a collection of named fields.

Creating Record Values
.......................
Record-type names may be used as if they were functions. Indeed they are (very simple) functions:
they create a record of the given type, with the given values for each field.

Accessing Fields
...................
You can access the fields of records using the dot-notation common to many languages.
(Also, text and some objects that come back from built-in functions may have fields you can access.)
For example, say you have a record-value called ``joe``. Then ``joe.eye_color`` would
refer to Joe's eye color, assuming ``joe`` has a field called ``eye_color``.
(If there is no such field, *Bed Spread* gets stuck at that expression.)

.. admonition:: Implementation Note

    In the Python-based interpreter, record-types are implemented in terms of the ``collections.namedtuple`` facility.
    Field access is therefore ``getattr``, and in consequence most of the object-oriented features of Python
    leak through the abstraction layer. This is handy for the foreign-function interface, but it means that
    potentially impure code could result.

Furthermore, if a field turns out to be a function of no remaining arguments, then it's called immediately.
Thus, for example, in **Bed Spread** you can write ``Gettysburg.upper`` and get back the
Gettysburg Address in upper case.

Lambda Forms
-------------

Don't let the Greek letter scare you. This is just how you pass functionality around.
Once the system around the language is a bit more developed, these may be less tempting
because it will always be possible to give some fragment of function a name.

An expression like ``\ x [ x + x ]`` means "a function that returns double its argument.
You can pass it as a parameter to another function, or you can call it directly
just as if it were the name of a function. (In fact, on the inside, function names
simply refer to objects like this.)

A form like the above, with a single parameter, takes a single anonymous argument.
If you need more than one parameter, simply separate them with whitespace.
For an extended example::

    \a b c[ (-b + sqrt(b^2 - 4*a*c)) / (2*a) ] (a:2, b:4, c:-8)

is how you might write, and then immediately use, a function that returns one root of a quadratic equation.

Inside the square brackets, you can use any name known outside them,
plus also the new names introduced as parameters.

Because there is no ambiguity, you can use round parentheses if you prefer.
You can also go with curly braces for a parameterized selection.

Clauses like "let" or "where"
-----------------------------
If you've been writing functional programs for a while,
you're used to having some way to factor out common subexpressions.
Something serving that purpose will show up in a future version of the language.
The plan is not yet fully-formed, but it will involve changes to the database schema
in order to represent static scoping relationships.
This probably depends on having a suitable code editor tool first.

Note on Evaluation Order
------------------------
The long-term plan is lazy evaluation (call-by-need) with a reasonable-sized memoization cache.
Maybe also some knobs and dials to tune performance or behavior.
But for the moment, I'm primarily focused on getting something fundamentally usable.
